Background and Research Questions

Marijuana legalization is looming around the corner for many states, especially New Jersey. Lawmakers operating in states wherein marijuana is not yet legalized need to be as informed as possible about the potential effects of marijuana legalization in order to better sculpt future policy and budgetary decisions. This project attempts to explore two relationships within the realm of road safety; the folk belief that marijuana legalization and increased use leads to decreased drunk driving fatalities, and the more concrete concern that marijuana legalization will significantly increase drugged driving fatalities. Dispelling or establishing these relationships might serve to help policy makers navigate the implications of changing marijuana laws. The focus of this research project will be on the relationship between rates of consumption of alcohol and marijuana, and fatal accidents associated with high and drunk driving. The two main research questions are as follows:

1. Does legalizing marijuana cause a significant decrease in drunk driving? 
2. Does legalizing marijuana cause a significant increase in drugged driving?

Data Sources and Collection

Data from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Data Archive (SAMHDA) contains information from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, a yearly survey which has been administered by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USPHHS) since 1971. For the 2008 survey, a random sample of 67,928 non-institutionalized individuals were surveyed using a in-person computer assisted self-interview, and around 500 less were survey using the methodology in 2016. The unit of observation was state average reported frequency of marijuana or alcohol use, which was pre-generated and copied directly from the reports issued by the USPHHS. Additionally, the rates I used were those reported by individuals between the ages of 18-25; these are higher relative to the general population. While I would have liked to apply the same stipulations to data from the FARS database (see next paragraph), there was simply not enough data available. However, these use rates are likely to be generally more reflective of those involved in fatal accidents as this age group has much higher automobile fatality involvement rates than other cohorts (4) and higher rates involving drug and alcohol use (5).

Data from the National Highway and Traffic Safety’s (NHTS) Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) is gathered by police officers when they document fatalities involving automobiles. The FARS database allows for queries based on whether individuals were simply involved in the crash (may include pedestrians), whether they were driving, and whether or not someone was present in the vehicle. In order to control for external factors which might be involved with crashes involving individuals not within the vehicle, I queried data based on the third option, and produced a cross-tabulation of the total amount of crashes in which police reported drug or alcohol involvement. The most recent year available for both datasets was 2017. Quality of the FARS database placed significant limitations on the quality and appropriateness of the analysis; while it would have been best to consider fatal crashes involving marijuana, there was not enough information to do so because reporting rates were low for many states. Although law enforcement departments are encouraged to fill out a FARS report for each fatal accident they encounter and submit them to the NHTS, they do not always do so, or do not complete the form completely. An even 10-year benchmark was appealing, but it seemed as though 2008 was the first in which many states reported a substantial amount of fatality-associated data.

Upon initial analysis, some of the state percentages of drug of alcohol seemed dubious - some reporting as high as 90 percent implication of each. Initially, I considered simulating a normal distribution to remove outliers. Instead, I created a factor which gave the ratio of combined reported (yes or no) drug or alcohol involvement, to unknown or unreported data, because. To ensure uniformity among the data sets, I filtered out any rate of drug or alcohol involvement with a report rate of 20 percent or less before inputting into R and changed these values to 0 so I could easily exclude them during later analysis. This eliminated outliers at both the high and low ends. Additionally, information about marijuana legality for each state was gathered via various open news sources - for the purpose of this analysis, each change in status was not recorded; just the status in 2008 and 2016.

“dddimpff” is the primary data set, which contains all of the information from the SAMHDA and FARS datasets, and legal status, as indicated in the previous section. This dataset was used for most of the analysis, and to generate Figures 3-19. “fca” is a secondary data set, which was only used for data representation, and to generate Figures 1 and 2. “ddimpfff” is another secondary dataset which included report rates, and was used to ensure that there was not a significant relationship between the amount of positive/negative substance involvement reported and the reported rates. 

Data Analysis I

This section visualizes all data points involving crash involvement, allowing for self-interpretation. On average, crashes involving alcohol are decreasing, whereas crashes involving drugs are increasing. However, rates for drug involvement increased more for states with legal or decriminalized marijuana. States which legalized before 2008 experienced a greater decrease in alcohol crash involvement than states which legalized/decriminalized between 2008-2016,  and lesser decrease than states wherein marijuana is still illegal/only medicinal. States which legalized between 2008 and 2016 experienced a slightly greater increase in drug crash involvement than those which legalized/decriminalized prior to 2008, and both groups experienced greater increase in drug crash involvement than states wherein marijuana remained illegal or only medicinal.

Data Analysis II

This section deals with testing the significance of the initial hypothesis regarding legality and drugged/drunk driving fatalities as a function of marijuana legal status. In order to answer the initial research questions, the statistical significance of the difference in means of crashes involving drugs/alcohol between states wherein marijuana was legalized/decriminalized or medicinal only/illegal was preformed using standard student t-tests. An analysis is carried out on two levels; one comparing legalized states to those wherein marijuana was strictly illegal or had medicinal marijuana, and those comparing legalized states to those in which marijuana is strictly illegal. In both cases, there is a significant difference in crashes involving drugs, but only if comparing for both 2008 and 2016 (Figure 4). For just 2016, the effect was not significant (p-value of 0.2017 including medicinal and 0.2638 excluding medicinal.) For the analysis involving both years, the mean for states with legal marijuana was 13.3, the mean for illegal states was 8.34, and the mean for states with medicinal/illegal laws was 8.69. Binning legalized and decriminalized states together did not show a significant difference between legal status and drug crashes. Differences between each other paired legalities were also tested, and no other significant differences were found - this includes drug crash rates of decriminalized states alone compared to illegal and medicinal status combined or alone. Means for each legality for both years are represented in Figure 8. There is also an exploration of whether alcohol crash involvement is affected by marijuana legality using the same methodology, and no significant differences between states with different legal statuses/grouped legalities were observed (Figures 3 and 7). 

Substance use rates as function of legality are also explored (Figures 5 and 6). A significant decrease (mean=-9.7) of alcohol use rates in states which decriminalized between 2008 and 2016 or had already decriminalized prior to 2008 was observed. Marijuana use as a function of legality is also measured. Significant differences in marijuana use are observed between states with legal (mean=30.01) and decriminalized (mean=23.08) laws (p-value=0.0036), and states with illegal (mean=17.58) and decriminalized (mean=23.08) marijuana (p-value=0.004) in just 2016. Nearly significant differences are observed between states with medicinal (mean=19.45) and decriminalized (mean=23.08) laws (p-value=0.054) and states with medicinal (mean=19.45) and illegal (17.58) marijuana (p-value=0.079) for 2016.

Inferential Statistics I

This section deals with inferential statistics about the strength of the relationship of alcohol or drug consumption rate between crashes involving drugs or alcohol. Figures 9-13 deal with the relationship between alcohol consumption rates on crashes involving either alcohol or drugs. Figures 14-16 deal with the relationship between marijuana consumption rates and crashes involving both alcohol and drugs. Figures 10-13 and 15-17 plot the range of uncertainty about the extent to which each consumption rate is related to it’s corresponding crash involvement rate. Linear models for just the significant relationships (view HTML output for p-values) are as follows; model 1: y=0.523x-7.015, model 2: y=0.678x-18.84, model 3: y=0.644x-15.77, model 4: y=0.477x-15.87, model 5: y=0.622x+6.72, model 6: y=0.654x-2.749, model 7: y=0.331x+16.239. In plain English…

Alcohol Use
M1: In 2008, every 1% increase in alcohol use, there is a 0.52% increase in fatal accidents involving alcohol.
M2: In 2016, every 1% increase in alcohol use, there is a 0.68% increase in fatal accidents involving alcohol.
M3: In 2008 and 2016 combined, for every 1% increase in alcohol use, there is a 0.68% increase in fatal accidents involving alcohol.
M4: In 2016, for every 1% increase in alcohol use, there is 0.48% increase in fatal accidents involving drugs.

Marijuana Use
M5: In 2016, for every 1% increase in marijuana use, there is 0.62% increase in fatal accidents involving alcohol.
M6: In 2016, for every 1% increase in marijuana use, there is 0.65% increase in fatal accidents involving marijuana
M7: In 2008 and 2016 combined, for every 1% increase in marijuana use, there is 0.33% increase in accidents involving marijuana.

Practical implications are that in 2016, marijuana use is a stronger predictor of drug involvement in crashes as alcohol is for crashes involving alcohol for both 2008 alone and 2008/2016 together, and nearly as strong of a predictor as alcohol use is for crashes involving alcohol for just 2016. Additionally, in 2016, marijuana use was a stronger predictor of fatal accidents involving drugs and fatal accidents involving alcohol than alcohol use was for fatal accidents involving alcohol in 2008.

Models of both use rates as predictors of drug and alcohol crashes indicate that it might be best to consider the effects of each use rate on their corresponding rate of crash involvement individually. Only significant models were reported for the first analysis of the relationship between substance use and crashes. Number of samples included in the model are as follows: alcohol crashes as marijuana use in 2016: n=50, drug crashes as marijuana use in 2016: n=43, alcohol crashes as marijuana use in 2008 and 2016:  n=97, alcohol crashes as alcohol use in 2016: n=50, alcohol crashes as alcohol use in 2008: n=47, alcohol crashes as alcohol use in 2008 and 2016: n=97, drug crashes as alcohol use in 2016: n=43

Inferential Statistics II

This section breaks down states by legality (Figures 18 and 19). The samples were quite small; n=6 for 2008 legal/decriminalized, n=17 for 2016 legal/decriminalized, and n=26 for both 2008 and 2016 illegal/medicinal. No relationships were significant. In order to make the labels and points on the figures (slightly) more legible, some points (no more than 10) were nudged no more than 1pt on either axis.

Conclusions

Future directions would be to produce a similar report which includes a more fine-grained analysis of years since legal status change, use and fatality data for each year and not just two, FARS data for the relevant age group, and information about marijuana crash involvement alone instead of general drug involvement. Alternatively, overall use rates might be used instead of a specific age group in order to perform a more rigorous and valid analysis. Unfortunately, lack of sufficient historical data does not lend itself to the quality of analysis which I was aiming for. Perhaps it would be useful to simulate distributions of crash rates per each legality in order to generate statistically significant models, but extremely low samples might make this equally as epistemically dubious. Additionally, I was disappointed that I was not able to establish significant differences between alcohol and drug crash involvement between legal groupings for either year group alone.
